content/blog/spiking_neurons.md, before:

---
title: "Spiking neurons: a digital hardware implementation"
date: 2022-12-28
description: "In this article, we will try to model a Leaky Spiking Neuron (LIF) using digital hardware: registers, memories, adders and so on."
math: true
draft: false
---

# Spiking neurons

In this article, we will try to model a layer of Leaky Integrate and Fire (LIF) spiking neurons using digital hardware: registers, memories, adders and so on. To do so, we will consider a single output neuron connected to multiple input neurons from a previous layer.

![neurons-connected](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/neurons-connected.png)

In a Spiking Neural Network (SNN), neurons communicate by means of **spikes**: these activation voltages are then converted to currents through the **synapses**, charging the **membrane potential** of the destination neuron. In the following, the destination neuron is denoted as **post-synaptic** neuron, with the index $i$, while the input neuron under consideration is denoted as **pre-synaptic** neuron, with the index $j$. 

We denote the input spike train incoming from the pre-synaptic neuron with $\sigma_{j}(t)$:
$$ \sigma_{j}(t) = \sum_{k} \delta(t-t_{k}) $$
where $t_{k}$ are the spike timestamps of the spike train $\sigma_{j}(t)$. 

The **synapse** connecting the pre-synaptic neuron with the post-synaptic neuron is denoted with $w_{ij}$. All the incoming spike trains are then **integrated** by the post-synaptic neuron membrane; the integration function can be modeled by a **first-order low-pass filter**, denoted with $\alpha_{i}(t)$:
$$ \alpha_{i}(t) = \frac{1}{\tau_{u_{i}}} e^{-\frac{t}{\tau_{u_{i}}}}$$
The spike train incoming from the pre-synaptic neuron, hence, is convolved with the membrane function; in real neurons, this corresponds to the **input currents** coming from the pre-synaptic neurons that **charge** the post-synaptic neuron membrane potential, $v_{i}(t)$. The sum of the currents in input to the post-synaptic neuron is denoted with $u_{i}(t)$ and modeled through the following equation:
$$ u_{i}(t) = \sum_{j \neq i}{w_{ij} \cdot (\alpha_{v} \ast \sigma_{j})(t)} $$
Each pre-synaptic neuron contributes with a current (spike train multiplied by the $w_{ij}$ synapse) and these sum up at the input of the post-synaptic neuron. Given the membrane potential of the destination neuron, denoted with $v_{i}(t)$, the differential equation describing its evolution  through time is the following:
$$ \frac{\partial}{\partial t} v_{i}(t) = -\frac{1}{\tau_{v}} v_{i}(t) + u_{i}(t)$$
In addition to the input currents, we have the **neuron leakage**, $\frac{1}{\tau_{v}} v_{i}(t)$, modeled through a **leakage coefficient** $\frac{1}{\tau_{v}}$ that multiplies the membrane potential.

# Discretising the model

Such a differential equation cannot be solved directly using discrete arithmetic, as it would be processed on digital hardware; hence, we need to **discretise** the equation. This discretisation leads to the following result:
    $$ v_{i}[t] = \beta \cdot v_{i}[t-1] + (1 - \beta) \cdot u_{i}[t] - \theta \cdot S_{i}[t] $$
where $\beta$ is the **decay coefficient** associated to the leakage. We embed $(1-\beta)$ in the input current $u_{i}[t]$, by merging it with the synapse weights as a scaling factor; in this way, the input current $u_{i}[t]$ is **normalised** regardless of the decay constant $\tau_{v}$ value.

Notice that the **membrane reset** mechanism has been added: when a neuron **spikes**, its membrane potential goes back to the rest potential (usually equal to zero), and this is modeled by **subtracting the threshold** $\theta$ from $v_{i}(t)$ when an output spike occurs. The output spike is modeled through a function $S_{i}[t]$:
$$ S_{i}[t] = 1 ~\text{if}~ v_{i}[t] \gt \theta ~\text{else}~ 0 $$ 
This is equal to 1 at spike time (i.e. if at timestamp $t$ the membrane potential $v_{i}[t]$ is larger than the threshold $\theta$) and 0 elsewhere.

The input current is given by:
$$ u_{i}[t] = \sum_{j \neq i}{w_{ij} \cdot S_{j}[t]} $$  
Notice that since $S_{i}[t]$ is either 0 or 1, the input current $u_{i}[t]$ is equal to the **sum of the synapses weights** of the pre-synaptic neurons that spike at timestamp $t$.

# Storage and addressing neurons states

Let us define the layer **fan-in**, i.e. how many pre-synaptic neurons are connected in input of each post-synaptic neuron in the layer; we denote this number with $N$. Then, we set the total number of neurons in our layer to $M$.

How do we describe a neuron in hardware? First of all, we need to list some basic information associated to each post-synaptic neuron:
- its **membrane potential** $v_{i}[t]$.
- the **weights  associated with the synapses**, $w_{ij}$; since each post-synaptic neuron is connected in input to $N$ neurons, these synapses can be grouped in an $N$-entries vector $W_{i}$.

Since there are $M$ neurons in the layer, we need an $M$-entries vector, denoted with $V[t]$, to store the membrane potentials values evaluated at timestamp $t$; this vector is associated with a **memory array** in the hardware architecture.

![potentials-memory](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/membrane-potentials.png)

An **address** is associated to each neuron, which can be thought as the $i$ index in the $V[t]$ vector; to obtain $v_{i}[t]$, the post-synaptic neuron address is used to index the membrane potentials memory $V[t]$.

We are now able to store and retrieve a post-synaptic neuron membrane potential using a memory; now, we would like to **charge it with some currents** in order to emulate the behaviour of a neuron membrane; to do that, we need to get the corresponding input synapses $W_{i}$, **multiply** these by the spikes of the associated pre-synaptic neurons, sum them up and, then, accumulate these in the post-synaptic neuron membrane. 

Let us start from a single input pre-synaptic neuron: 
$$ u_{ij}[t] = w_{ij} \cdot S_{j}[t] $$
We know that $S_{j}[t]$ is either 1 or 0; hence, we have either $u_{ij}[t] = w_{ij}$ or $u_{ij}[t] = 0$; this means that the synapse weight is **either added or not** to the total current $u_{i}[t]$. This means that the weight $w_{ij}$ is read from memory **only if the corresponding pre-synaptic neuron spikes!** Given our layer of $M$ neurons, each of which is connected in input to $N$ synapses, we can think of grouping the $M \cdot N$ weights in a **matrix**, which can be associated with another memory array, denoted with $W$.

![synapses-memory](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/synapses-weights.png)

This memory has to be addressed with the pre-synaptic neuron and the post-synaptic neuron indices to retrieve the weight $w_{ij}$, which automatically corresponds to the $u_{ij}[t]$ current being accumulated in the post-synaptic neuron membrane when the pre-synaptic neuron spikes. 

# Spikes accumulation

Given the data structure defined for the neuron (i.e. membrane potential and synapses), let us implement some functionalities, starting with the **membrane potential charging** of a post-synaptic neuron. When the pre-synaptic neuron spikes, its synapse weight $w_{ij}$ gets extracted from the synapse memory $W$ and multiplied by the spike; since the spike is a **digital bit** equal to 1, this is equivalent to **using $w_{ij}$ itself as input current** for the post-synaptic neuron; to add this current to $v_{i}[t]$, we need to use an arithmetic circuit called **adder**!

![accumulation](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/accumulation.png)

The membrane potential $v_{i}[t]$ is read from the potentials memory $V[t]$ and added to the corresponding synapse current $w_{ij}$; the result is the membrane potential of the next time step, $v_{i}[t+1]$, that is stored in the **register** put on the adder output; this value is written back to the $V[t]$ memory in the next clock cycle. The register storing the adder output is denoted as **membrane register**.

To **prevent multiple read-write cycles**, one can think of adding a loop to the membrane register in order to **accumulate all the currents** of the pre-synaptic neurons that are spiking at timestep $t$ and writing the final value $v_{i}[t+1]$ back to memory **only once**. The corresponding circuit is shown in the following.

![accumulation-loop](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/accumulation-loop.png)

A **multiplexer** is placed on one side of the adder; in this way:
- the first weight $w_{i0}$ to be accumulated is added to the $v_{i}[t]$ read from memory and saved to the membrane register:
$$ v_{i}[t+1] = v_{i}[t] + w_{i0} $$ 
- the successive weights are added to the membrane register content, so that all the currents are accumulated before writing $v_{i}[t+1]$ back to memory; using a non rigorous notation, this can be translated to the following equation: 
$$ v_{i}[t+1] = v_{i}[t+1] + w_{ij},~ 0 \lt j \leq N $$

# Excitatory and inhibitory neurons

Our post-synaptic neuron is able to accumulate spikes in its membrane; however, there is not only kind of spike! In fact, an pre-synaptic neuron can be **excitatory** (i.e. it **charges** the post-synaptic neuron membrane) or **inhibitory** (i.e. it **discharges** the post-synaptic neuron membrane); in the digital circuit, this phenomenon corresponds to **adding** or **subtracting**, respectively, the synapse weight $w_{ij}$ to or from $v_{i}[t]$; this functionality can be added to the architecture by placing an adder capable of performing **both additions and subtractions**, choosing among these with a control signal generated by an **FSM (Finite State Machine)**, which is a sequential digital circuit that evolves through a series of states depending on its inputs and, consequently, generates controls signals for the rest of the circuit. 

![inhibitory](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/inhibitory.png)

This FSM, given the operation to be executed on the post-synaptic neuron, chooses if the adder has to add or subtract the synapse current. 

However, is this design efficient in terms of resources employed? It has to be reminded that inhibitory and excitatory neurons are chosen at **chip programming time**; this means that **the neuron type does not change during the chip operation** (however, with the solution we are about to propose, it would not be a problem to change the neuron type on-the-fly); hence, we can **embed this information** in the neuron description by **adding a bit to the synapses weights memory row** that, depending on its value, denotes that neuron as excitatory or inhibitory.

![synapse-encoding](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/synapse-encoding.png)

Suppose that, given a pre-synaptic neuron, all its $M$ output synapses are stored in a memory row of $n$ bits words, where $n$ is the number of bits to which the synapse weight is quantized. At the end of the memory row $j$, we add a bit denoted with $e_{j}$ that identifies the neuron type and that is read together with the weights from the same memory row: if the pre-synaptic neuron $j$ is **excitatory**, $e_{j}=1$ and the weight is **added**; if it is **inhibitory**, $e_{j}=0$ and the weight is **subtracted**; in this way, **the $e_{j}$ field of the synapse can drive the adder directly**, with no control circuit in between and without employing additional clock cycles. 

![modified-adder](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/modified-adder.png)

# Leakage 

Let us introduce the characteristic feature of the LIF neuron: the **leakage**! We shall choose a (constant) leakage factor $\beta$ and multiply it by $v_{i}[t]$ to obtain $v_{i}[t+1]$:
$$ v_{i}[t+1] = \beta \cdot v_{i}[t] $$ 
However, multiplication is an **expensive** operation in hardware; furthermore, the leakage factor is **smaller than one**, so we would need to perform a **fixed-point multiplication** or, even worse, a **division**! How can we solve this problem?

If we choose $\beta$ as a power of $\frac{1}{2}$, such as $2^{-n}$, the multiplication becomes **equivalent to a $n$-positions right shift**! A really **hardware-friendly** operation! 

![leak](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/leak.png)

In this circuit, an $n$-positions righ-shift block, denoted with the symbol `>>`, is placed on one of the adder inputs to obtain $\beta \cdot v_{i}[t]$ from $v_{i}[t]$. A **multiplexer** has to introduced to choose among the synapse weight $w_{ij}$ and the leakage contribution $\beta \cdot v_{i}[t]$ as input to the adder.

Notice that **leakage has to be always subtracted** from the membrane potential; hence, we cannot use $e_{j}$ directly to control the adder but we must modify the circuit so that a subtraction is performed during a leakage operation. A possible idea is to use a signal from the FSM and a **logic AND gate** to force the adder control signal to 0 during a leakage operation.

![subtract-leak](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/subtract-leak.png)

Denoting with `adder_ctrl` the signal which controls the adder and with `leak_op_n` the one provided by the FSM, and stating that:
- for `adder_ctrl=1`, the adder performs an addition, otherwise a subtraction.
- `leak_op_n=0` when a leakage operation has to performed.

`adder_ctrl` can be obtained as the logic AND operation of `leak_op_n` and $e_{j}$ so that, when `leak_op_n=0`, `adder_ctrl=0` regardless of the value of $e_{j}$ and a subtraction is performed by the adder.

# Spike mechanism 

Well, our neuron needs to spike! If this is encoded as a logic one, given a threshold $\theta$, we simply need to **compare $v_{i}[t]$ to $\theta$** and generate a logic 1 in output **when the membrane potential is larger than the threshold**. This can be implemented using a **comparator**. 

![spike](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/spike.png)

The output of the comparator is used directly as **spike bit**.

The membrane has to be **reset** when the neuron spikes; hence, we need to **subtract $\theta$ from $v_{i}[t]$ when the neuron fires**. This can be done by driving the input multiplexer of the membrane register to provide $\theta$ in input to the adder, that operates as a subtractor.

![reset](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/reset.png)

However, do we need all this hardware? We can be smarter than this:
- by choosing $\theta = 2^m-1$, where $m$ is the bitwidth of the membrane register and the adder, having $v_{i}[t] \gt \theta$ is **equivalent to having an overflow in the addition**. Hence, the comparison result is equal to the **overflow flag** of the adder, which can be **directly provided in output as spike bit**.
- instead of subtracting $\theta$ from the membrane register, we can save an operation by simply **resetting** $v_{i}[t]$ to 0 when a spike occurs; this is equivalent to using the oveflow flag of the adder as **reset signal for the membrane register**. This should not be done in an actual implementation: at least a **register** should be added on the reset signal of the membrane register to prevent glitches in the adder circuit from resetting it when it should not be.

The resulting circuit is the following.

![smart-reset](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/smart-reset.png)

Way simpler!

# Conclusion

Here we are, with a first prototype of our LIF layer digital circuit. In the next episode:
- we will make it actually work. 
- we will implement it in Verilog. 
- we will simulate it using open source tools, such as [Verilator](ihttps://www.veripool.org/verilator/).

# Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank [Jason Eshraghian](https://jasoneshraghian.com) ,[Steven Abreu](https://stevenabreu.com) and [Gregor Lenz](https://lenzgregor.com) for the valuable corrections and comments that made this article way better than the original draft!

# Bibliography

- [*Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-Chip Learning*](https://redwood.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Davies2018.pdf), Mike Davies et al., 2018.
- [*Training Spiking Neural Networks Using Lessons From Deep Learning*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.12894), Jason Eshraghian et al., 2022.
- [*Bottom-Up and Top-Down Neuromorphic Processor Design: Unveiling Roads to Embedded Cognition*](https://dial.uclouvain.be/pr/boreal/object/boreal%3A226494/datastream/PDF_01/view), Charlotte Frenkel, 2020
- [*TrueNorth: Design and Tool Flow of a 65 mW 1 Million Neuron Programmable Neurosynaptic Chip*](https://redwood.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Akopyan2015.pdf), Filipp Akopyan et al., 2015

Commit message:

Final version with Gregor comments.

content/blog/spiking_neurons.md, after:

---
title: "Spiking neurons: a digital hardware implementation"
date: 2022-12-28
description: "In this article, we will try to model a Leaky Spiking Neuron (LIF) using digital hardware: registers, memories, adders and so on."
math: true
draft: false
---

# Spiking neurons

In this article, we will try to model a layer of Leaky Integrate and Fire (LIF) spiking neurons using digital hardware: registers, memories, adders and so on. To do so, we will consider a single output neuron connected to multiple input neurons from a previous layer.

![neurons-connected](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/neurons-connected.png)

In a Spiking Neural Network (SNN), neurons communicate by means of **spikes**: these activation voltages are then converted to currents through the **synapses**, charging the **membrane potential** of the destination neuron. In the following, the destination neuron is denoted as **post-synaptic** neuron, with the index $i$, while the input neuron under consideration is denoted as **pre-synaptic** neuron, with the index $j$. 

We denote the input spike train incoming from the pre-synaptic neuron with $\sigma_{j}(t)$:
$$ \sigma_{j}(t) = \sum_{k} \delta(t-t_{k}) $$
where $t_{k}$ are the spike timestamps of the spike train $\sigma_{j}(t)$. 

The **synapse** connecting the pre-synaptic neuron with the post-synaptic neuron is denoted with $w_{ij}$. All the incoming spike trains are then **integrated** by the post-synaptic neuron membrane; the integration function can be modeled by a **first-order low-pass filter**, denoted with $\alpha_{i}(t)$:
$$ \alpha_{i}(t) = \frac{1}{\tau_{u_{i}}} e^{-\frac{t}{\tau_{u_{i}}}}$$
The spike train incoming from the pre-synaptic neuron, hence, is convolved with the membrane function; in real neurons, this corresponds to the **input currents** coming from the pre-synaptic neurons that **charge** the post-synaptic neuron membrane potential, $v_{i}(t)$. The sum of the currents in input to the post-synaptic neuron is denoted with $u_{i}(t)$ and modeled through the following equation:
$$ u_{i}(t) = \sum_{j \neq i}{w_{ij} \cdot (\alpha_{v} \ast \sigma_{j})(t)} $$
Each pre-synaptic neuron contributes with a current (spike train multiplied by the $w_{ij}$ synapse) and these sum up at the input of the post-synaptic neuron. Given the membrane potential of the destination neuron, denoted with $v_{i}(t)$, the differential equation describing its evolution  through time is the following:
$$ \frac{\partial}{\partial t} v_{i}(t) = -\frac{1}{\tau_{v}} v_{i}(t) + u_{i}(t)$$
In addition to the input currents, we have the **neuron leakage**, $\frac{1}{\tau_{v}} v_{i}(t)$, modeled through a **leakage coefficient** $\frac{1}{\tau_{v}}$ that multiplies the membrane potential.

# Discretising the model

Such a differential equation cannot be solved directly using discrete arithmetic, as it would be processed on digital hardware; hence, we need to **discretise** the equation. This discretisation leads to the following result:
    $$ v_{i}[t] = \beta \cdot v_{i}[t-1] + (1 - \beta) \cdot u_{i}[t] - \theta \cdot S_{i}[t] $$
where $\beta$ is the **decay coefficient** associated to the leakage. We embed $(1-\beta)$ in the input current $u_{i}[t]$, by merging it with the synapse weights as a scaling factor; in this way, the input current $u_{i}[t]$ is **normalised** regardless of the decay constant $\tau_{v}$ value.

Notice that the **membrane reset** mechanism has been added: when a neuron **spikes**, its membrane potential goes back to the rest potential (usually equal to zero), and this is modeled by **subtracting the threshold** $\theta$ from $v_{i}(t)$ when an output spike occurs. The output spike is modeled through a function $S_{i}[t]$:
$$ S_{i}[t] = 1 ~\text{if}~ v_{i}[t] \gt \theta ~\text{else}~ 0 $$ 
This is equal to 1 at spike time (i.e. if at timestamp $t$ the membrane potential $v_{i}[t]$ is larger than the threshold $\theta$) and 0 elsewhere.

The input current is given by:
$$ u_{i}[t] = \sum_{j \neq i}{w_{ij} \cdot S_{j}[t]} $$  
Notice that since $S_{i}[t]$ is either 0 or 1, the input current $u_{i}[t]$ is equal to the **sum of the synapses weights** of the pre-synaptic neurons that spike at timestamp $t$.

# Storage and addressing neurons states

Let us define the layer **fan-in**, i.e. how many pre-synaptic neurons are connected in input of each post-synaptic neuron in the layer; we denote this number with $N$. Then, we set the total number of neurons in our layer to $M$.

How do we describe a neuron in hardware? First of all, we need to list some basic information associated to each post-synaptic neuron:
- its **membrane potential** $v_{i}[t]$.
- the **weights  associated with the synapses**, $w_{ij}$; since each post-synaptic neuron is connected in input to $N$ neurons, these synapses can be grouped in an $N$-entries vector $W_{i}$.

Since there are $M$ neurons in the layer, we need an $M$-entries vector, denoted with $V[t]$, to store the membrane potentials values evaluated at timestamp $t$; this vector is associated with a **memory array** in the hardware architecture.

![potentials-memory](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/membrane-potentials.png)

An **address** is associated to each neuron, which can be thought as the $i$ index in the $V[t]$ vector; to obtain $v_{i}[t]$, the post-synaptic neuron address is used to index the membrane potentials memory $V[t]$.

We are now able to store and retrieve a post-synaptic neuron membrane potential using a memory; now, we would like to **charge it with some currents** in order to emulate the behaviour of a neuron membrane; to do that, we need to get the corresponding input synapses $W_{i}$, **multiply** these by the spikes of the associated pre-synaptic neurons, sum them up and, then, accumulate these in the post-synaptic neuron membrane. 

Let us start from a single input pre-synaptic neuron: 
$$ u_{ij}[t] = w_{ij} \cdot S_{j}[t] $$
We know that $S_{j}[t]$ is either 1 or 0; hence, we have either $u_{ij}[t] = w_{ij}$ or $u_{ij}[t] = 0$; this means that the synapse weight is **either added or not** to the total current $u_{i}[t]$. This means that the weight $w_{ij}$ is read from memory **only if the corresponding pre-synaptic neuron spikes!** Given our layer of $M$ neurons, each of which is connected in input to $N$ synapses, we can think of grouping the $M \cdot N$ weights in a **matrix**, which can be associated with another memory array, denoted with $W$.

![synapses-memory](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/synapses-weights.png)

This memory has to be addressed with the pre-synaptic neuron and the post-synaptic neuron indices to retrieve the weight $w_{ij}$, which automatically corresponds to the $u_{ij}[t]$ current being accumulated in the post-synaptic neuron membrane when the pre-synaptic neuron spikes. 

# Spikes accumulation

Given the data structure defined for the neuron (i.e. membrane potential and synapses), let us implement some functionalities, starting with the **membrane potential charging** of a post-synaptic neuron. When the pre-synaptic neuron spikes, its synapse weight $w_{ij}$ gets extracted from the synapse memory $W$ and multiplied by the spike; since the spike is a **digital bit** equal to 1, this is equivalent to **using $w_{ij}$ itself as input current** for the post-synaptic neuron; to add this current to $v_{i}[t]$, we need to use an arithmetic circuit called **adder**!

![accumulation](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/accumulation.png)

The membrane potential $v_{i}[t]$ is read from the potentials memory $V[t]$ and added to the corresponding synapse current $w_{ij}$; the result is the membrane potential of the next time step, $v_{i}[t+1]$, that is stored in the **register** put on the adder output; this value is written back to the $V[t]$ memory in the next clock cycle. The register storing the adder output is denoted as **membrane register**.

To **prevent multiple read-write cycles**, one can think of adding a loop to the membrane register in order to **accumulate all the currents** of the pre-synaptic neurons that are spiking at timestep $t$ and writing the final value $v_{i}[t+1]$ back to memory **only once**. The corresponding circuit is shown in the following.

![accumulation-loop](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/accumulation-loop.png)

A **multiplexer** is placed on one side of the adder; in this way:
- the first weight $w_{i0}$ to be accumulated is added to the $v_{i}[t]$ read from memory and saved to the membrane register:
$$ v_{i}[t+1] = v_{i}[t] + w_{i0} $$ 
- the successive weights are added to the membrane register content, so that all the currents are accumulated before writing $v_{i}[t+1]$ back to memory; using a non rigorous notation, this can be translated to the following equation: 
$$ v_{i}[t+1] = v_{i}[t+1] + w_{ij},~ 0 \lt j \leq N $$

# Excitatory and inhibitory neurons

Our post-synaptic neuron is able to accumulate spikes in its membrane; however, there is not only kind of spike! In fact, an pre-synaptic neuron can be **excitatory** (i.e. it **charges** the post-synaptic neuron membrane) or **inhibitory** (i.e. it **discharges** the post-synaptic neuron membrane); in the digital circuit, this phenomenon corresponds to **adding** or **subtracting**, respectively, the synapse weight $w_{ij}$ to or from $v_{i}[t]$; this functionality can be added to the architecture by placing an adder capable of performing **both additions and subtractions**, choosing among these with a control signal generated by an **FSM (Finite State Machine)**, which is a sequential digital circuit that evolves through a series of states depending on its inputs and, consequently, generates controls signals for the rest of the circuit. 

![inhibitory](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/inhibitory.png)

This FSM, given the operation to be executed on the post-synaptic neuron, chooses if the adder has to add or subtract the synapse current. 

However, is this design efficient in terms of resources employed? It has to be reminded that inhibitory and excitatory neurons are chosen at **chip programming time**; this means that **the neuron type does not change during the chip operation** (however, with the solution we are about to propose, it would not be a problem to change the neuron type on-the-fly); hence, we can **embed this information** in the neuron description by **adding a bit to the synapses weights memory row** that, depending on its value, denotes that neuron as excitatory or inhibitory.

![synapse-encoding](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/synapse-encoding.png)

Suppose that, given a pre-synaptic neuron, all its $M$ output synapses are stored in a memory row of $n$ bits words, where $n$ is the number of bits to which the synapse weight is quantized. At the end of the memory row $j$, we add a bit denoted with $e_{j}$ that identifies the neuron type and that is read together with the weights from the same memory row: if the pre-synaptic neuron $j$ is **excitatory**, $e_{j}=1$ and the weight is **added**; if it is **inhibitory**, $e_{j}=0$ and the weight is **subtracted**; in this way, **the $e_{j}$ field of the synapse can drive the adder directly**, with no control circuit in between and without employing additional clock cycles. 

![modified-adder](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/modified-adder.png)

# Leakage 

Let us introduce the characteristic feature of the LIF neuron: the **leakage**! We shall choose a (constant) leakage factor $\beta$ and multiply it by $v_{i}[t]$ to obtain $v_{i}[t+1]$:
$$ v_{i}[t+1] = \beta \cdot v_{i}[t] $$ 
However, multiplication is an **expensive** operation in hardware; furthermore, the leakage factor is **smaller than one**, so we would need to perform a **fixed-point multiplication** or, even worse, a **division**! How can we solve this problem?

If we choose $\beta$ as a power of $\frac{1}{2}$, such as $2^{-n}$, the multiplication becomes **equivalent to a $n$-positions right shift**! A really **hardware-friendly** operation! 

![leak](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/leak.png)

In this circuit, an $n$-positions righ-shift block, denoted with the symbol `>>`, is placed on one of the adder inputs to obtain $\beta \cdot v_{i}[t]$ from $v_{i}[t]$. A **multiplexer** has to introduced to choose among the synapse weight $w_{ij}$ and the leakage contribution $\beta \cdot v_{i}[t]$ as input to the adder.

Notice that **leakage has to be always subtracted** from the membrane potential; hence, we cannot use $e_{j}$ directly to control the adder but we must modify the circuit so that a subtraction is performed during a leakage operation. A possible idea is to use a signal from the FSM and a **logic AND gate** to force the adder control signal to 0 during a leakage operation.

![subtract-leak](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/subtract-leak.png)

Denoting with `adder_ctrl` the signal which controls the adder and with `leak_op_n` the one provided by the FSM, and stating that:
- for `adder_ctrl=1`, the adder performs an addition, otherwise a subtraction.
- `leak_op_n=0` when a leakage operation has to performed.

`adder_ctrl` can be obtained as the logic AND operation of `leak_op_n` and $e_{j}$ so that, when `leak_op_n=0`, `adder_ctrl=0` regardless of the value of $e_{j}$ and a subtraction is performed by the adder.

# Spike mechanism 

Our neuron needs to spike! If this is encoded as a digital bit, given a threshold $\theta$, we **compare $v_{i}[t]$ to $\theta$** and generate a logic 1 in output **when the membrane potential is larger than the threshold**. This can be implemented using a **comparator** circuit. 

![spike](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/spike.png)

The output of the comparator is used directly as **spike bit**.

The membrane has to be **reset to a rest potential** when the neuron spikes; hence, we need to **subtract $\theta$ from $v_{i}[t]$ when the neuron fires**. This can be done by driving the input multiplexer of the membrane register to **provide $\theta$ in input to the adder**, that has to perfor a subtraction.

![reset](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/reset.png)

However, this architecture can be simplified:
- by choosing $\theta = 2^m-1$, where $m$ is the **bitwidth of the membrane register and the adder**, having $v_{i}[t] \gt \theta$ is **equivalent to having an overflow in the addition**; hence, the comparison result is equal to the **overflow flag** of the adder, which can be **provided directly in output as spike bit**.
- instead of subtracting $\theta$ from the membrane register, we can **reset** $v_{i}[t]$ to 0 when a spike occurs by forcing the membrane register content to 0 with a control signal; this is equivalent to using the oveflow flag of the adder as **reset signal for the membrane register**. This should not be done in an actual implementation: at least a **register** should be added on the reset signal of the membrane register to prevent glitches in the adder circuit from resetting it when it should not be.

The resulting circuit is the following.

![smart-reset](/images/blog/spiking_neurons/smart-reset.png)

Way simpler!

# Conclusion

Here we are, with a first prototype of our LIF layer digital circuit. In the next episode:
- we will make it actually work. 
- we will implement it in Verilog. 
- we will simulate it using open source tools, such as [Verilator](ihttps://www.veripool.org/verilator/).

# Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank [Jason Eshraghian](https://jasoneshraghian.com) ,[Steven Abreu](https://stevenabreu.com) and [Gregor Lenz](https://lenzgregor.com) for the valuable corrections and comments that made this article way better than the original draft!

# Bibliography

- [*Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-Chip Learning*](https://redwood.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Davies2018.pdf), Mike Davies et al., 2018.
- [*Training Spiking Neural Networks Using Lessons From Deep Learning*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.12894), Jason Eshraghian et al., 2022.
- [*Bottom-Up and Top-Down Neuromorphic Processor Design: Unveiling Roads to Embedded Cognition*](https://dial.uclouvain.be/pr/boreal/object/boreal%3A226494/datastream/PDF_01/view), Charlotte Frenkel, 2020
- [*TrueNorth: Design and Tool Flow of a 65 mW 1 Million Neuron Programmable Neurosynaptic Chip*](https://redwood.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Akopyan2015.pdf), Filipp Akopyan et al., 2015
