content/updates/index.md, before:

---
title: "Updates"
type: page
---

### 2023-08-01

[Jason Eshraghian](https://jasoneshraghian.com) and I gave a tutorial on high level synthesis for neuromorphic computing at [ICONS 2023](https://icons.ornl.gov/schedule/)! Check out the [Github repository](https://github.com/fabrizio-ottati/icons23-tutorial).

### 2023-04-20

I have visited [Innatera](https://www.innatera.com/) headquarters for Open Neuromorphic! And we had some nice beer and ramen too :) Thanks to Kasia Kozdon and Rui Texeira for inviting me!

### 2023-02-01

I joined [Charlotte Frenkel](https://chfrenkel.github.io)'s research team at TU Delft for a visiting period. I am going to work on SNN deployment to FPGAs for [autonomous drones](https://mavlab.tudelft.nl/research-topics/), in collaboration with Guido de Croon's research team.

### 2022-12-13

I changed Ph.D. advisor and research team. I'll be working under the supervision of [Luciano Lavagno](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=tRCNWC4AAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao).

Commit message:

Added the talk at the ProRISC and SAFE conference.

content/updates/index.md, after:

---
title: "Updates"
type: page
---

### 2023-08-01

[Jason Eshraghian](https://jasoneshraghian.com) and I gave a tutorial on high level synthesis for neuromorphic computing at [ICONS 2023](https://icons.ornl.gov/schedule/)! Check out the [Github repository](https://github.com/fabrizio-ottati/icons23-tutorial).

### 2023-07-11

I presented a poster and I did a talk at the [ProRISC & SAFE](https://www.tudelft.nl/prorisc-safe/programme-2023/program) conference, hosted by TU Delft, on my internship here.

### 2023-04-20

I have visited [Innatera](https://www.innatera.com/) headquarters for Open Neuromorphic! And we had some nice beer and ramen too :) Thanks to Kasia Kozdon and Rui Texeira for inviting me!

### 2023-02-01

I joined [Charlotte Frenkel](https://chfrenkel.github.io)'s research team at TU Delft for a visiting period. I am going to work on SNN deployment to FPGAs for [autonomous drones](https://mavlab.tudelft.nl/research-topics/), in collaboration with Guido de Croon's research team.

### 2022-12-13

I changed Ph.D. advisor and research team. I'll be working under the supervision of [Luciano Lavagno](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=tRCNWC4AAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao).
